---
layout: post
title: Selfish Approach towards Handling a Pandemic- NATO continues with its war drills and US turns a blind eye to the social crisis
date: 2020-07-20 13:00:00-0400
---


Even when there is a pandemic around that has infected millions of people and taken many lives, countries still seem to be distracted and involved in activities that might not be of a priority at present. Instead of focusing its time and resources to fight the COVID-19 pandemic, many economies are diverting their energy towards things that are not as urgent. One such (almost) irresponsible task was carried out by NATO- as they carried out war drills/military exercise in the Baltic Sea recently.  

NATO (North Atlantic Treaty Organization) is an intergovernmental military alliance between 30 countries from North America and Europe. This alliance started in 1949 after the participating countries signed the North Atlantic Treaty. NATO conducts these military exercises, called BALTOPS, in the Baltic Sea almost every year whereby troops from different countries participate and practice their war mechanisms. The exercise was carried out from 7th June 2020 to 16th June 2020 this year, in which, around 3000 personnel from 19 different NATO members participated. BALTOPS is the largest military exercise carried out in the Baltic Sea and was carried out with around 30 ships and submarines and 30 aircrafts this year.

It was stated that certain precautions were taken to prevent the spread of COVID-19 among the participating personnel. All the personnel were tested for COVID-19 before the operations began. The exercise was commanded by the Naval Striking and Support Forces (NATO/STRIKFORNATO) from its headquarters offshore in Lisbon, Portugal instead of being present at the site. They had also reduced the number of personnel participating in the exercise to minimize the ‘crowd’. Similarly, no amphibious drills were used in the exercise to make sure that there is no spreading of the virus between the ships and land. The entire exercise was conducted in the sea. Officials also informed that the personnel were asked to maintain a safe distance and practice social distancing during the exercise. 

Many have criticized these precautions stating that this military exercise was conducted at high risk and the measures taken were not enough. It is almost impossible for participants to maintain a safe distance during such an intense exercise and thus, it can be said that they were in risk of getting infected.  Julian Pawlak and Sebastian Bruns, two naval analysts at the University of Kiel expressed that even though the scope of the exercise was reduced, the fact that it was still organized in the middle of a pandemic indicated an attempt to project power play and strength by participating countries. The BALTOPS operations were also condemned this year because they were carried out despite Russia proposing against it. Russia shares its border with the Baltic Sea, hence, even when Russia proposed to not carry out the operations because of the pandemic, NATO declined their proposal and went forward with it.

While the pandemic is impacting the lives of millions of people, some of the most developed countries still seem to not completely understand, accept and realize the gravity of this situation. One of the most talked about countries right now is the United States, also a leading member of NATO, as it has been criticized constantly for taking the pandemic lightly and thus exposing its people to this deadly virus. Donald Trump’s response to this virus has almost been predictable- he continues boasting about himself, believes that he has handled the crisis well and refuses to see the errors in his approach. This attitude of the president seems to reflect on the citizens too as there is a lot of negligence on their behalf as well. While many U.S. residents understand the seriousness of the situation and advocate for the precautionary measures, significant number of people continue fighting for their right to ‘individual freedom’ and in turn refuse to do even the bare minimum to minimize the risk, that is, wear a mask. It is safe to say that American society is in a social crisis now and it struggles to unite, to fight possibly the biggest threat of our generation. It is a classic example of a ‘frog in the well’situation as many people have turned a blind eye to the risks in the bigger picture while basking in the glory of their ‘privilege’.

Yascha Mounk of ‘The Atlantic’ identifies various theories to explain the irresponsible behavior of US residents. According to him, the simplest explanation is ignorance. Some U.S. residents are genuinely ignorant and haven’t followed the news properly to understand the seriousness of the situation. This sounds unrealistic as COVID-19 is being discussed everywhere at all times and it is almost impossible to avoid information about it. Mounk’s second explanation is that people are being straightaway selfish. Some people do not care about the risk and the adverse effects of the virus and thus, they continue to lead their lives like they did before. Based on what is floating on the internet, this explanation seems much more likely as certain people in the U.S. seem to have completely disregarded the risk associated with the virus. This behavior is ‘immoral’ as people, in the name of their ‘individual rights’ are willing to harm the society, which is unjustifiable and unacceptable. 

Whatever the reason might be, it is safe to say that the social crisis in America right now is at its worst. From the mishandling of the pandemic by the state to the reckless behavior of many of its citizens, U.S. has become the most affected country by the pandemic and struggles to find a way out of it despite being one of the strongest economies in the world.


References used:

https://www.militarytimes.com/news/your-military/2020/06/11 russia-nato-conduct-parallel-wargames-over-baltic-sea/
https://www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/news_176191.htm#:~:text=Around%203%2C000%20personnel%20from%2019,and%20submarines%2C%20and%2030%20aircraft.
https://www.defensenews.com/global/europe/2020/06/04/warships-mass-in-the-baltic-sea-for-a-coronavirus-conscious-battle-drill/
https://valdaiclub.com/a/highlights/-defenders-of-europe-threats-to-the-world-or-why/
https://www.lrt.lt/en/news-in-english/19/1186728/nato-kicks-off-baltic-sea-drills-downscaled-due-to-pandemic
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-52012049
https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2020/03/moral-instincts-coronavirus/608305/

