---
layout: post
title: Mainstream International Median turns a blind eye while Yemen suffers
date: 2020-08-17 13:00:00-0400
---


While ‘media’ is hailed as the fourth pillar of the constitution and a completely impartial member of the civil society by idealists, the inherent bias in media’s approach and coverage is prominent, and even menacing, in today’s day and age. While the biggest democracies struggle by virtue of its notorious media’s extremist behavior, international media also seems to cater to specific ‘power-holders’ and only include as well as spread stories that suit their bias.

The unfair treatment of mainstream international media towards Yemen and its ongoing crisis clearly indicates the lack of objectivity and decreasing reliability in the media industry. Since the war broke out in 2015, Yemen is going through an extreme humanitarian crisis	 and millions of citizens are living in horror. About 100,000 people have lost their lives to this war while 8.4 million people are food insecure. https://www.mironline.ca/the-silent-war-how-the-u-s-media-failed-yemen/  In a report published by UNICEF in 2017, it was stated that a child dies every 10 minutes in Yemen and 400,000 Yemeni children are at a risk of starvation https://www.dw.com/en/yemen-conflict-all-but-ignored-by-the-west/a-37157913. 

Saudi Coalition (United Arab Emirates, Saudi Arabia, Qatar, Oman, Kuwait and Bahrain), also known as the PGCC (Persian Gulf Cooperation Council) has left no stone unturned to ensure that Yemeni citizens live a horrifying life and struggle to even have a basic hand-to-mouth existence. Since the Houthi rebel group ousted then President Abdrabbuh Mansour Hadi in 2015, it seems like PGCC is determined to reinstall the former government in Yemen and is taking extreme measures for it. They have imposed a blockade on Yemen which has left 20 million people in need of humanitarian assistance while more than 12,000 people have lost their lives to this selfish act. https://www.tehrantimes.com/news/422166/Three-years-of-Saudi-heinous-crimes-in-Yemen 

While Yemen suffers, rest of the world has almost turned a blind eye to it, likely because of the power dynamics that exists among states. Yemen is getting ‘weaker’ by the day and Saudi coalition is the new favorite in town- hence, despite the severity of these circumstances, the news is often not picked by many mainstream media houses barring a few. It is believed that Iran, a political foe to Saudi, is backing the Houthi rebel group while Saudi is backing the former government. Hence, many argue that, whenever the news is covered, it is driven by the narrative of Saudi v/s Iran and completely ignores the ongoing crisis in Yemen. https://www.dw.com/en/yemen-conflict-all-but-ignored-by-the-west/a-37157913 

The local journalists in Yemen, who are observing and living the crisis everyday, are also compelled to not report any of it because of the danger surrounding it. The Yemeni Journalist Syndicate reports that more than a 100 press violations were committed in the first few months of 2016 itself whereas there have been multiple cases of abductions and assaults targeted to journalists. https://www.dw.com/en/yemen-conflict-all-but-ignored-by-the-west/a-37157913 Thus, it is almost impossible for local journalists to find a safe space to cover the news in Yemen and foreign journalists have also basically decided to not cover it. That is one of the reasons behind this war being termed the ‘forgotten war’. https://www.trtworld.com/opinion/media-has-completely-failed-to-hold-anyone-accountable-for-yemen-misery-25303

Even when International media does cover the happenings of Yemen, it is often presented as a Saudi-Iranian war and almost always ‘forgets’ to mention the role of western governments in fuelling the war. It is known that Saudi gets most of its arms and ammunitions from UK, US and France and Saudi even uses the satellite technology from US to identify targets during air strikes. It is reported that the US had sold $5.5 billion and UK had sold $1.4 billion worth of arms and ammunitions to the Saudi coalition by the end of 2017. https://www.trtworld.com/opinion/media-has-completely-failed-to-hold-anyone-accountable-for-yemen-misery-25303 

This clearly explains the conflict of interest that International media faces while covering the news. The western media, who boast about their democratic and impartial approach, have deprived their audience of the harsh realities of Yemen and kept it all under the wraps. The realities of the war in Yemen is covered so rarely in the media that people hardly get enough information to get interested or understand the issue and raise their voices against it. As a professor at the University of Sheffied, Piers Robinson told Al Jazeera ‘"When you have coverage which doesn't really provide context or a proper understanding of the key actors in a conflict and also the role of our own governments, publics are left with a sense of a confused conflict where it's not clear who's right or wrong, it's not clear whether or not we're involved in it". It all seems like a systematic plan- power holders do as they please and the ones who are supposed to question their intentions and actions choose to just not see the problem.

Along with mainstream international media’s own bias, another major factor hindering the coverage of news on Yemen is the danger associated with it. Even if a independent journalist does want to visit and report from Yemen, there is a lot of danger involved that makes them pull back. Afrah Nasser, an independent Yemeni Journalist based in Sweden talked to DW about ‘parachute journalism’. He explained that the coverage by international media is not very detailed as it is actually difficult to access Yemen easily. Entering in the country and then coming back is a lot of hassle which might not be preferable to many. https://www.dw.com/en/yemen-conflict-all-but-ignored-by-the-west/a-37157913 One of the other reasons behind this lack of coverage is Saudi Arabia strategy of buying media silence and hiring many PR companies to polish its image.

Whatever the reasons might be, the ultimate truth remains that Yemen is suffering and it needs strong voices to speak for it and support it. And for that to happen, people must have access to information regarding the ongoing crisis in Yemen so that they can take a stand. Thus, mainstream media must let go of their bias, keep the politics and power dynamics aside, and be as objective as possible to ensure that everyone has access to reliable information. 

